.TH SIGIL 1
.SH NAME
sigil \- composable workflow CLI with built-in software-change workflows
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sigil dashboard [\-\-host 127.0.0.1] [\-\-port <number>] [\-\-root <dir>]...
.br
.B sigil config show \-\-effective [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json]
.br
.B sigil profile <add|remove|list|inspect|status|next|enable|disable|prime|rearm> ...
.br
.B sigil task\-graph validate [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json] <task\-file> | sigil task\-graph schema [\-\-out <file>]
.br
.B sigil migrate \-\-repo <dir> \-\-target <file> \-\-backlog <file> \-\-run\-dir <dir>
.br
.B sigil refactor \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-focus <path>]... [\-\-protected\-path <path>]...
.br
.B sigil probe \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>] [\-\-max\-probes <n>]
.br
.B sigil plan \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>]
.br
.B sigil software\-change \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>] [\-\-task\-file <file>] [\-\-branch <name>] [\-\-instructions <file>]
.br
.B sigil implement \-\-repo <dir> \-\-task\-file <file> [\-\-branch <name>] [\-\-instructions <file>] [\-\-publish]
.br
.B sigil review \-\-repo <dir> \-\-base <ref> [\-\-no\-autofix] [\-\-context <text>]
.br
.B sigil breakdown \-\-repo <dir> \-\-mission <text> [\-\-out <file>]
.br
.B sigil dispatch \-\-repo <dir> \-\-backlog <file> \-\-policy mergeWhenGreen|integrationBranch \-\-run\-dir <dir> [...] | sigil dispatch \-\-resume <dir>
.br
.B sigil validate\-workflow [\-\-repo <dir>] <workflow\-file>
.br
.B sigil validate\-sigil <workflow.ts>
.br
.B sigil run\-workflow \-\-repo <dir> \-\-file <workflow\-file>
.br
.B sigil run\-sigil \-\-repo <dir> \-\-file <workflow.ts> [\-\-input <input.json>] [\-\-out <result.json>] [\-\-run\-dir <dir>] [\-\-persistence durable|ephemeral]
.br
.B sigil setup [\-\-dir <repo>] [\-\-force]
.br
.B sigil discover\-env [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Sigil is a composable workflow system with built-in software-change workflows. Run \fBsigil <verb> --help\fR for command-specific help.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS dashboard
Serve a read\-only live dashboard for local Sigil runs.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil dashboard [\-\-host 127.0.0.1] [\-\-port <number>] [\-\-root <dir>]...\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-host <loopback>\fR
Loopback host. Defaults to 127.0.0.1; remote binding is rejected.
.TP
\fB\-\-port <number>\fR
Local HTTP port. Defaults to 4317; use 0 to select an available port.
.TP
\fB\-\-root <dir>\fR
Optional repeatable additional run\-discovery root; the current directory is included automatically.
.P
Exit codes: 0 after an orderly local shutdown; 1 when startup fails.
.SS config
Inspect deterministic effective project configuration and its provenance.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil config show \-\-effective [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fBshow \-\-effective\fR
Resolve defaults, project input, and command overlays without probing providers.
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Repository directory. Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
Print the stable machine\-readable effective\-configuration record.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when effective configuration is printed; 1 for invalid or missing configuration; 2 for invalid usage.
.SS profile
Manage local provider profiles and inspect routing eligibility.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil profile <add|remove|list|inspect|status|next|enable|disable|prime|rearm> ...\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fBadd <name> \-\-provider <codex|claude> \-\-class <subscription|metered\-api>\fR
Register a provider\-owned authentication context and bounded routing policy.
.TP
\fB\-\-home <dir> | \-\-default\-config | \-\-config\-dir <dir> | \-\-credential\-source <name>\fR
Select provider\-owned authentication without displaying its location or credential source.
.TP
\fB\-\-concurrency <count>\fR
Limit simultaneous assignments for the profile.
.TP
\fB\-\-token\-limit <count>\fR
Set the metered admission token budget.
.TP
\fB\-\-start\-limit <count>\fR
Set the metered agent\-start budget.
.TP
\fB\-\-runtime\-limit\-ms <count>\fR
Set the cumulative metered runtime budget.
.TP
\fB\-\-reservation\-tokens <count>\fR
Reserve this maximum token charge for each admitted metered agent.
.TP
\fB\-\-quantum <percentage>\fR
Reserve this headroom for each admitted subscription agent.
.TP
\fB\-\-reserve\-floor <percentage>\fR
Keep subscription admission above this inclusive 0\-100 capacity floor.
.TP
\fB\-\-capacity\-poll\-ms <milliseconds>\fR
Set the bounded live\-capacity polling cadence for an active subscription assignment.
.TP
\fB\-\-mode <manual|overflow|automatic>\fR
Explicitly authorize when a metered profile may be assigned; overflow is used only after subscriptions are ineligible.
.TP
\fB\-\-require\-rearm\fR
Require explicit rearm after metered completion or active subscription capacity exhaustion.
.TP
\fB\-\-admission\-usd <amount> \-\-operation\-usd <amount>\fR
Bound Claude API admission and each admitted operation.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
Print a versioned, machine\-readable record instead of the safe human summary.
.TP
\fBlist [\-\-provider <provider>]\fR
List safe registry summaries without reading live provider state.
.TP
\fBinspect <provider:name|unique\-name>\fR
Show one profile policy and its stored routing state.
.TP
\fBnext <provider:name|unique\-name> \-\-agents <count>\fR
Route a bounded number of new agents without bypassing eligibility policy.
.TP
\fBprime <provider:name|unique\-name> [\-\-repo <dir>]\fR
Explicitly start a Codex subscription window; Claude returns unsupported.
.TP
\fBrearm <name>\fR
Clear authentication, capacity, transient, and metered rearm blocks without changing active reservations or usage accounting.
.TP
\fBstatus [\-\-provider <provider>]\fR
Show current eligibility and safe provider evidence separately from registry inspection.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the requested local profile operation succeeds; 1 otherwise.
.SS task\-graph
Validate an assistant\-authored task graph or print its public schema.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil task\-graph validate [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json] <task\-file> | sigil task\-graph schema [\-\-out <file>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fBvalidate <task\-file>\fR
Validate one task graph's structure, dependencies, cycles, and repository paths.
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Repository directory used to resolve and check task file paths.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
Print the stable machine\-readable validation record.
.TP
\fBschema\fR
Print the public task\-graph JSON Schema.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <file>\fR
Write the schema to a file instead of standard output.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when validation succeeds or the schema is written; 1 when validation fails; 2 for invalid usage.
.SS migrate
Apply a dependency\-ordered repository migration with verified commit checkpoints.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil migrate \-\-repo <dir> \-\-target <file> \-\-backlog <file> \-\-run\-dir <dir>\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Clean named branch to migrate.
.TP
\fB\-\-target <file>\fR
Required. Target architecture and invariants.
.TP
\fB\-\-backlog <file>\fR
Required. Dependency\-ordered migration backlog JSON.
.TP
\fB\-\-run\-dir <dir>\fR
Required. Durable external checkpoint, event, and review directory; temporary storage is rejected.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when every item, final review, build, and test passes; 1 otherwise.
.SS refactor
Apply a behavior\-preserving structural change with analysis, gates, and independent review.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil refactor \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-focus <path>]... [\-\-protected\-path <path>]...\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Clean target repository to refactor in place.
.TP
\fB\-\-intent <text>\fR
Required. Structural change to make while preserving behavior.
.TP
\fB\-\-brief <file>\fR
Optional file with refactor constraints and invariants.
.TP
\fB\-\-focus <path>\fR
Optional repeatable starting path; additional relevant paths remain available.
.TP
\fB\-\-protected\-path <path>\fR
Optional repeatable path the refactor must not modify.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when final build and test gates pass without recorded issues; 1 otherwise.
.SS probe
Run sandboxed probes, synthesize findings, and produce a task graph.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil probe \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>] [\-\-max\-probes <n>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository to investigate without modifying.
.TP
\fB\-\-intent <text>\fR
Required. Product or workflow improvement intent to probe.
.TP
\fB\-\-brief <file>\fR
Optional file with extra non\-authoritative probe context.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <file>\fR
Optional task graph output path.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-probes <n>\fR
Optional maximum number of generated probe commands to run.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the produced task graph is valid and the target working tree is preserved; 1 otherwise.
.SS plan
Turn an intent and optional brief into a task graph.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil plan \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-intent <text>\fR
Required. Change intent to plan.
.TP
\fB\-\-brief <file>\fR
Optional file with extra planning context.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <file>\fR
Optional task graph output path.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the produced task graph is valid; 1 otherwise.
.SS software\-change
Plan, implement, verify, review, and report one local change without publishing.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil software\-change \-\-repo <dir> \-\-intent <text> [\-\-brief <file>] [\-\-out <file>] [\-\-task\-file <file>] [\-\-branch <name>] [\-\-instructions <file>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-intent <text>\fR
Required. Change intent to plan and implement.
.TP
\fB\-\-brief <file>\fR
Optional file with extra planning context.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <file>\fR
Optional task graph output path.
.TP
\fB\-\-task\-file <file>\fR
Optional existing typed task graph file to implement without planning.
.TP
\fB\-\-branch <name>\fR
Optional implementation branch name.
.TP
\fB\-\-instructions <file>\fR
Optional run\-specific implementation instructions.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the workflow result is valid and reports no issues; 1 otherwise.
.SS implement
Apply a task graph, commit verified tasks, run gates, and review locally.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil implement \-\-repo <dir> \-\-task\-file <file> [\-\-branch <name>] [\-\-instructions <file>] [\-\-publish]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-task\-file <file>\fR
Required. Task graph JSON file.
.TP
\fB\-\-branch <name>\fR
Optional branch name.
.TP
\fB\-\-instructions <file>\fR
Optional run\-specific implementation instructions.
.TP
\fB\-\-publish\fR
After local success, push the branch and open a pull request.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when review is not blocking and no failed tasks or issues are reported; with \-\-publish, pull\-request creation must also succeed.
.SS review
Review the current diff against a base ref.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil review \-\-repo <dir> \-\-base <ref> [\-\-no\-autofix] [\-\-context <text>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-base <ref>\fR
Required. Base ref for the diff.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-autofix\fR
Disable the autofix pass.
.TP
\fB\-\-context <text>\fR
Optional review context.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when there are no unresolved high findings and no reported issues; 1 otherwise.
.SS breakdown
Turn a mission into an ordered backlog file.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil breakdown \-\-repo <dir> \-\-mission <text> [\-\-out <file>]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-mission <text>\fR
Required. Mission text.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <file>\fR
Optional backlog output path.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the produced backlog is valid; 1 otherwise.
.SS dispatch
Call software\-change for backlog items, then merge and verify by policy.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil dispatch \-\-repo <dir> \-\-backlog <file> \-\-policy mergeWhenGreen|integrationBranch \-\-run\-dir <dir> [...] | sigil dispatch \-\-resume <dir>\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-backlog <file>\fR
Required. Backlog JSON file.
.TP
\fB\-\-policy mergeWhenGreen|integrationBranch\fR
Required delivery policy.
.TP
\fB\-\-integration\-branch <branch>\fR
Required with integrationBranch. Accumulating branch for item changes.
.TP
\fB\-\-final\-action openPullRequest|mergeWhenGreen\fR
Integration delivery action after all items pass. Defaults to openPullRequest.
.TP
\fB\-\-production\-gate <name>\fR
Configured gate run after a successful final merge.
.TP
\fB\-\-run\-dir <dir>\fR
Required durable dispatch manifest, operation, and recovery directory.
.TP
\fB\-\-resume <dir>\fR
Resume the recorded operation after validating repository state and live process ownership.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when dispatch finishes; 1 when it stops on a deterministic failure; 75 when durable capacity waiting is retryable.
.SS validate\-workflow
Validate a static YAML workflow file.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil validate\-workflow [\-\-repo <dir>] <workflow\-file>\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Repository directory used to resolve config\-backed agents. Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
\fB<workflow\-file>\fR
Required. YAML workflow file.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the workflow error array is empty; 1 otherwise.
.SS validate\-sigil
Validate a TypeScript sigil file without running it.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil validate\-sigil <workflow.ts>\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB<workflow.ts>\fR
Required. TypeScript sigil file exporting default or named workflow.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the sigil imports and has a callable export; 1 otherwise.
.SS run\-workflow
Run a static YAML workflow file against a target repository.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil run\-workflow \-\-repo <dir> \-\-file <workflow\-file>\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-file <workflow\-file>\fR
Required. YAML workflow file.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the workflow completes without recorded issues; 1 otherwise.
.SS run\-sigil
Launch a detached TypeScript sigil run against a target repository.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil run\-sigil \-\-repo <dir> \-\-file <workflow.ts> [\-\-input <input.json>] [\-\-out <result.json>] [\-\-run\-dir <dir>] [\-\-persistence durable|ephemeral]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Required. Target repository.
.TP
\fB\-\-file <workflow.ts>\fR
Required. TypeScript sigil file exporting default or named workflow.
.TP
\fB\-\-input <input.json>\fR
Optional JSON object merged into the workflow input; \-\-repo wins over any repo field in the file.
.TP
\fB\-\-out <result.json>\fR
Optional final result path written by the detached worker.
.TP
\fB\-\-run\-dir <dir>\fR
Optional run directory for the manifest, PID, status, events, log, artifacts, result, and error; durable runs default to <repo>/.sigil/runs/.
.TP
\fB\-\-persistence durable|ephemeral\fR
Storage policy. Durable is the default and rejects temporary repositories, inputs, outputs, and run directories.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the detached worker launches; 1 when launch validation fails.
.SS setup
Write the default sigil.config.json and ignore local run state.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil setup [\-\-dir <repo>] [\-\-force]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-dir <repo>\fR
Repository directory. Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
\fB\-\-force\fR
Overwrite an existing config file.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the config is written; 1 when it already exists without \-\-force.
.SS discover\-env
Report prerequisites for each configured role and candidate transport without probing authentication.
.P
Usage: \fBsigil discover\-env [\-\-repo <dir>] [\-\-json]\fR
.P
Arguments and flags:
.TP
\fB\-\-repo <dir>\fR
Repository directory. Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
Print the versioned prerequisite report as JSON.
.P
Exit codes: 0 when the environment report is printed; 1 when config cannot be loaded.
.SH SEE ALSO
sigil <verb> --help

